---
title: Controling fan speed ThinkPad laptops
layout: single
---

I have an old Lenovo T410 laptop with i5 CPU and 4 GB RAM. It is far from being a nuclear power station, but worked reliably on my minimalist Linux setup (Manjaro and DWM) till now.

A few days ago I had some overheating problems, that was caused by excessive CPU usages. Actually it happened when I was building the fancy [leftwm](https://github.com/leftwm/leftwm) from an AUR repository. CPU was constantly around 100 percent and temperature went above 90C, so the machine turned off itself automatically. Then I checked my BIOS setting under Power menu,| and I have found an option at `"Adaptive thermal management" -> "Scheme for AC"` and changed to `"Balanced"` from `"Maximize performance"`. After rebooting I successfuly installed leftwm. (However the temperature was still risky around 85C degree, and the process took quite long. Hope it is worth the struggle.)

Lessons learned: constantly monitor your hardware states to avoid major hw deffects. Below I breifly describe some CLI tools I use and also and show how to manually control your cooling device on a ThinkPad notebook like mine (T410).

TLP package provides "you the benefits of advanced power management for Linux without the need to understand every technical detail. TLP comes with a default configuration already optimized for battery life, so you may just install and forget it." ([ArchWiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/TLP)) Moreover there are some features of tlp that were specifically provided for ThinkPads. `tlp-stat` shows basic information on your current config. (cf. `man tlp-stat` `tlp-stat -c`) Afte

To be sure that thinkpad_acpi kernel modul has been loaded, you can issue these commands:

```
sudo dmesg | grep -i acpi
lsmod | grep thinkpad
```
A convenient way to get information on temperatures, voltage, and fans from your terminal is provided by [lm-sensors](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/lm_sensors) package. 





thinkfan package - hard and risky properly configure Arch wiki is obsolote and no copy-paste reasonable defaults.

however you can check and control fan speed manually

cat /proc/acpi/ibm/fan
```
# cat /proc/acpi/ibm/fan
status:		enabled
speed:		3735
level:		auto
commands:	level <level> (<level> is 0-7, auto, disengaged, full-speed)
commands:	enable, disable
commands:	watchdog <timeout> (<timeout> is 0 (off), 1-120 (seconds))
```

As root user (not simply with sudo) one can control the fan speed:

1. Change to root account with `sudo -i` or `sudo su` then
2. `echo level 7 > /proc/acpi/ibm/fan`
3. Probably you can hear, but verify increased ventilator speed

# cat /proc/acpi/ibm/fan
status:		enabled
speed:		4549
level:		7
commands:	level <level> (<level> is 0-7, auto, disengaged, full-speed)
commands:	enable, disable
commands:	watchdog <timeout> (<timeout> is 0 (off), 1-120 (seconds))


## Related:

- hwinfo
